---
title: Call Logger
author: attilathedud
date: 2023-12-25
category: Tool Development
layout: post
---

# Target

Our target in this lesson will be Wesnoth 1.14.9.

# Overview

When reversing complex applications like video games, one of the most
difficult steps is establishing a context inside the application. While
there are many techniques to establish a context, one approach is to
create a modified debugger that logs all
**call** instructions executed by the application. Actions
can then be executed in the game, such as clicking a button, and all the
related calls can be observed. The logged calls can then be used to
establish a context and begin reversing the target.

Our goal in this lesson is to modify the debugger we created in the
previous lesson to log all call instructions made by the target. The full
code for this lesson is available on [github.](https://github.com/GameHackingAcademy/Call_Logger)

<video controls autoplay loop>
  <source src="/assets/images/7/6/logger.mp4" />
</video>

# Locating the Main Module

In the previous lesson, we wrote a break instruction to a single location
inside Assault Cube. Our target for this lesson will be Wesnoth.
Therefore, we will modify the code responsible for locating the process's
pid to find the Wesnoth process and remove the code responsible for
writing the single breakpoint:

```c++
do {
  if (wcscmp(pe32.szExeFile, L"wesnoth.exe") == 0) {
    pid = pe32.th32ProcessID;

    process_handle = OpenProcess(PROCESS_ALL_ACCESS, true, pe32.th32ProcessID);
  }
} while (Process32Next(process_snapshot, &pe32));
```

For this tool, we will only log calls in the main game module and not in
external DLL’s, such as user32.dll. To determine the beginning and end
address of the main module, we will first use the [EnumProcessModules](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/psapi/nf-psapi-enumprocessmodules) API to retrieve a list of all loaded modules. Then, we will use the [GetModuleInformation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/psapi/nf-psapi-getmoduleinformation) API to retrieve the address space of the first module, which always
represents the main game module. We will execute this code in the first
debug event that occurs in the target (when we attach our debugger to the
process):

```c++
HMODULE modules[128] = { 0 };
MODULEINFO module_info = { 0 };

DWORD bytes_read = 0;

if (!first_break_has_occurred) {
  EnumProcessModules(process_handle, modules, sizeof(modules), &bytes_read);
  GetModuleInformation(process_handle, modules[0], &module_info, sizeof(module_info));
```

The **GetModuleInformation** API will fill
**module_info.SizeOfImage** with the size of the main module,
and **module_info.lpBaseOfDll** with the base address of the
main module. With this range, we can begin searching for
**call** instructions.

Like we have done previously, we will use
**ReadProcessMemory** to read the instructions into a buffer.
While we would like to read the entire memory of the whole process, this
approach will not work. This is because different memory sections of the
process have different memory protections. If the section does not allow
reading, the call to **ReadProcessMemory** will fail. If we
try to read the entire memory of the process in one call, we will
encounter a section that fails, and then the entire read will fail.

To deal with this, we will instead read the memory in sections. These
sections are called memory pages, and the default memory page size in
Windows is 4096 bytes. As such, we will create a loop to read 4096 bytes
of instructions at a time. We will use the
**bytes_read** parameter to determine how many bytes of the
page were actually read:

```c++
#define READ_PAGE_SIZE 4096

unsigned char instructions[READ_PAGE_SIZE] = { 0 };

for (DWORD i = 0; i < module_info.SizeOfImage; i += READ_PAGE_SIZE) {
  ReadProcessMemory(process_handle, (LPVOID)((DWORD)module_info.lpBaseOfDll + i), &instructions, READ_PAGE_SIZE, &bytes_read);
  for (DWORD c = 0; c < bytes_read; c++) {

  }
}
```

# Locating Calls

Next, we will locate the **call** instructions in each page
of memory. We know that the opcode for the
**call** instruction is `0xe8`. While iterating
over each instruction, we will check to see if it is `0xe8`:

```c++
BYTE instruction_call = 0xe8;
...
for (DWORD c = 0; c < bytes_read; c++) {
  if (instructions[c] == instruction_call) {

  }
}
```

However, not all `0xe8`'s represent
**call** instructions. For example, the opcode for the
**add eax, ebp** instruction is `0x01 e8`. We need
to ensure that we do not identify these random `0xe8`'s as
calls. The easiest way to do that is to read the 4 bytes after the
**call**.

As we know from the [Using Code Caves](/pages/2/06/) lesson, these 4 bytes encode
the location of the **call**. By retrieving this location, we
can check if the calculated location of these bytes is valid. If not, we
can assume that the `0xe8` is not a **call** and
use the **continue** instruction to escape this check:

```c++
DWORD offset = 0;
DWORD call_location = 0;
DWORD call_location_bytes_read = 0;
... 
if (instructions[c] == instruction_call) {
  offset = (DWORD)module_info.lpBaseOfDll + i + c;
  ReadProcessMemory(process_handle, (LPVOID)(offset + 1), &call_location, 4, &call_location_bytes_read);

  call_location += offset + 5;
  if (call_location < (DWORD)module_info.lpBaseOfDll || call_location >(DWORD)module_info.lpBaseOfDll + module_info.SizeOfImage)
    continue;
```

Finally, we will write a break instruction (`0xcc`) to the
location. In addition to **WriteProcessMemory**, we will use
the [FlushInstructionCache](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/processthreadsapi/nf-processthreadsapi-flushinstructioncache) API to make sure our changes are done immediately to the target:

```c++
BYTE instruction_break = 0xcc;
...
WriteProcessMemory(process_handle, (void*)offset, &instruction_break, 1, &bytes_written);
FlushInstructionCache(process_handle, (LPVOID)offset, 1);
```

Writing thousands of break instructions to a process can cause the program
to crash. To avoid this, we will only write 2000 breakpoints:

```c++
int breakpoints_set = 0;
...
if (breakpoints_set < 2000) {
  WriteProcessMemory... 
  breakpoints_set++;
}
```

# Handling Breakpoints

Now that we have written breakpoints to all the calls, we need to handle
the breakpoint events. We will start with the same approach that we used
in the previous lesson:

```c++
else {
  thread_handle = OpenThread(THREAD_ALL_ACCESS, true, debugEvent.dwThreadId);
  if (thread_handle != NULL) {
    context.ContextFlags = CONTEXT_ALL;
    GetThreadContext(thread_handle, &context);

    context.Eip--;

    SetThreadContext(thread_handle, &context);
    CloseHandle(thread_handle);

    WriteProcessMemory(process_handle, (void*)context.Eip, &instruction_call, 1, &bytes_written);
    FlushInstructionCache(process_handle, (LPVOID)context.Eip, 1);
  }
}
```

Like we saw before, this code will decrease **EIP** and
restore the original **call** instruction. Then, execution
will resume at the **call** and the program will continue
execution normally. The downside with this approach is that each
breakpoint is only hit once. For our call logger, we want to log each time
a **call** is executed. To achieve this behavior, we will use
single-step mode.

Single-stepping is a special type of debug event that executes a single
instruction before triggering an exception again. To enable single-step
mode, we modify the **EFlags** of the current thread like so:

```c++
context.Eip--;
context.EFlags |= 0x100;
```

Next, we need to handle the single-step event. We will introduce another
case for this:

```c++
case EXCEPTION_SINGLE_STEP:
```

When we receive our exception here, it means that the
**call** has finished executing. Ultimately, our goal in this
event is to restore the break instruction. We can do this via
**WriteProcessMemory** in an identical way to restoring the
**call** instruction:

```c++
thread_handle = OpenThread(THREAD_ALL_ACCESS, true, debugEvent.dwThreadId);
if (thread_handle != NULL) {
  context.ContextFlags = CONTEXT_ALL;
  GetThreadContext(thread_handle, &context);
  CloseHandle(thread_handle);

  WriteProcessMemory(process_handle, (void*)last_call_location, &instruction_break, 1, &bytes_written);
  FlushInstructionCache(process_handle, (LPVOID)last_call_location, 1);
}
```

With this code in place, our breakpoints will be restored after being
triggered.

# Adding Logging

Finally, we will add logging to this code so that we can see the triggered
breakpoints. In our debug event, we will store the current location of
**EIP**:

```c++
DWORD last_call_location = 0;
... 
last_call_location = context.Eip;
```

Next, in the single-step event, we will add the logging code. We know at
this point that we have executed the **call** and we are at
the **call**'s location. Now we can use the following print
statement to print the **call**'s address and the location
called:

```c++
printf("0x%08x: call 0x%08x\n", last_call_location, context.Eip);
last_call_location = 0;
```

In this lesson, we are only logging the calls as they happen. However, it
is possible to modify this code to also hook
**ret** instructions. This would allow you to build out a
graph showing all calls made by the process and which calls call other
calls.

&nbsp;
