---
title: Hacking Fundamentals
author: attilathedud
date: 2023-12-25
category: Basics
layout: post
---

# Hacking Steps 

All hacking consists of modifying memory in a game. Writing any hack involves four main steps:

* Identify what you want to change.
* Understand what memory you need to locate.
* Locate that memory in the game.
* Change that memory.

These steps apply for any hack, regardless of the complexity.

# Identify 

The first step for any hack is to identify what you want to do. Different hacks will require different approaches. For example, modifying a player's money will require a memory modification of a variable, whereas seeing other players through walls will require a memory modification of the game's code.

# Understand 

To modify memory, we need to locate it. Before we attempt to locate it, we need to understand what memory we need to locate. In some cases, the memory you want to modify will be a variable. In other cases, you will want to modify large sections of code. There are three main types of modifications:

* Variables, like modifying the value of a player's money
* Code, like modifying how walls are drawn
* Files, like modifying the saved items in your inventory

# Locate 

Once you know what you want to change and understand where to look, you can start looking for it. For some hacks, this may involve searching memory with a tool called a memory scanner. For others, it may involve looking through the game's code using a tool called a debugger. Depending on the game and approach, this can be a time-consuming process.

# Change

After you have located the memory, the last step is to change it. Initially, this will mean using a memory scanner or debugger to manually modify the memory. Once you have verified that this works, you can write a program to automatically change it for you.

&nbsp;