---
title: Programming Fundamentals
author: attilathedud
date: 2023-12-25
category: Programming
layout: post
---

# Overview

In the previous lessons, we explored techniques to hack Wesnoth, including
changing memory (such as gold) and changing code (such as recruiting
units). However, all of these changes only persisted until we closed
Wesnoth. To regain these hacks upon reopening the game, we would then have
to repeat the initial process in a memory scanner or debugger.

This is both tedious and impossible to distribute to a larger audience.
However, since we can now defeat DMA, we know that any memory we need to
change is always in a static location. Because of this, we can create a
set of instructions that contains the changes we wish to make. Creating
this set of instructions in a way that a computer can understand is known
as programming. By programming hacks, we can create programs that can be
executed and will automatically change the memory we care about. We can
also distribute these programs to other people who want to experiment with
our hacks.

Programming, as a whole, is too large of a topic to comprehensively cover
in these lessons. Instead, we will focus on the subset of programming that
is relevant for creating hacks.

# Programming Languages

In the [Computer Fundamentals](/pages/1/01/)
lesson, we briefly covered programming languages. Programming languages
allow code to be written in a human-readable form. This code is then
translated down to instructions that a CPU can understand. There are many
programming languages, and they can be broken down into roughly two
categories: what they execute on, and how they execute.

Programming languages can create code that either executes directly on a
CPU or executes through an interpreter. An interpreter works by
dynamically translating the initial code into a form that the CPU can
understand. These two types are known as compiled languages and
interpreted languages, respectively. Programming languages can also either
execute instructions in order (top to bottom), or through the declaration
and resolution of functions. These types are known as imperative and
functional, respectively.

A language can be classified by applying those two modifiers. For example,
C is a compiled, imperative language. Java is an interpreted, imperative
language. Haskell is an example of a compiled, functional language.
Interpreted languages can be compiled as well, often by bundling the
interpreter and the initial instructions together.

There is no correct or best language. Some languages are better suited for
different purposes, but all languages can achieve every purpose. However,
when programming game hacks, we have several restrictions that limit our
choice of language. The language we pick needs to support three main
features:

- Direct access to the Windows API
- Modification other applications' memory
- Loaded and executed on the CPU

All of these requirements will be explained later, but they basically
exclude interpreted languages. In addition, languages that don't allow
direct memory access, such as Java, are excluded.

# C++

There are several languages that support the three criteria above. These
include C and C#, as well as compiled versions of python. However, C++
offers the best combination of high-level language features (such as
classes and strings) and low-level direct access to memory. This makes C++
ideal for programming game hacks.

C++ is a compiled, imperative language. It is a relatively difficult
language to learn, but we will only need to understand a subset of its
features to create game hacks. One of its most important features, for us,
is the ability to create pointers that can directly modify memory
addresses.

# Pointers

Pointers are another complex topic that we will only cover briefly.
Pointers are a type of variable that point to another section of memory.
For example, take the following C++ code:

```c++
int x = 5;
int *y = &x;
```

In C++, a **\*** represents a pointer declaration. The
**&** returns the address of a variable. So, after
executing this code, the variable **y** points to the
variable **x**. Consider the following code:

```c++
*y = 6;
```

This code will dereference (or get the address it points at)
**y** and then assign that value to **6**. After
this code executes, the variable **x** will also be
**6**, since this was the value that
**y** points to.

Applying this to game hacking, let’s say we find a gold value at
`0x12345678` and this value is not dynamically allocated. If we
were to load our C++ program into the game's address space, we could use a
pointer to modify the value of the gold:

```c++
int *gold = (int*)0x12345678;
*gold = 999;
```

After executing, the gold value at `0x12345678` will now be set
to 999. Pointers give us a large amount of control over a game’s memory,
but they can be hard to understand. We will explore them more in following
lessons.

# Types of Hacks

There are three main types of game hacks that can be programmed. These
are:

- External executables
- Injected DLL’s (dynamic-link libraries)
- Custom wrappers

Each of these has its own use-case. External executables are stand-alone
programs that can be executed normally. These executables use functions
built into Windows, known as Application Programming Interfaces (API’s),
to read and modify memory of another executable. By contrast, injected
DLL’s need to be loaded into the game's memory in some way. Once loaded,
they execute within the memory of the game and can directly access the
game's memory through pointers. Custom wrappers are used when creating
hacks that target the game's drawing libraries, such as DirectX and
OpenGL. By loading a custom version of these libraries that "wrap" the
original functionality, we can cause the game's drawing logic to be
altered.

&nbsp;
